In this lecture you will learn
all about the auto-fit and auto-fill keywords,
and also how to build truly responsive layouts
with them without writing a single media query.
So let's get rid of this code that we have here.
And add a new comment here.
So using auto-fill
and auto-fit.
Okay.
And actually, we want to roll this back,
okay, so that we have a 150 pixels row.
So we're also back to the 1,000 pixel container here, okay?
So just like we have defined here,
and that's better to show you how auto-fit
and auto-fill actually work.
Okay?
So where and how do we use these keywords?
So let me show it to you.
So grid-template-columns,
and so what we usually did was to use the repeat keyword,
right, then put some number in here, like four,
and then say, for example, one fractional unit, right?
And that then translate to something like this.
But what if we didn't want to specify
this exact number here?
What if we simply wanted to adapt this
to the number of items that we have?
So, for example, let's put 100 pixels here,
and it now is going to create four columns,
each with 100 pixels.
But imagine if you want it to have eight columns here,
but instead of writing eight,
we wanted this to happen automatically.
And that is where auto-fill comes in.
So, instead of a number here, we can write auto-fill,
and then CSS Grid is automatically gonna create
eight tracks for us.
And actually, in fact, it's not just eight tracks,
it creates 10 tracks, okay?
Let me show that to you here with the Inspector.
And so here we see the 10 column tracks.
And why 10, and not eight?
Well, that's because our container is 1,000 pixels,
as you can see, and we specified
that we wanted 100 pixel columns,
and so 1,000 divided by 100 is, of course, 10.
And therefore, it then creates 10 column tracks.
And then after that it actually puts our items
in there also, of course.
Okay, does it make sense?
So again, what auto-fill here does
is that it automatically creates as many tracks
with the desired width the we specify here
as fit into the container.
And in this case, that's 10 tracks, okay?
Because 1,000 divided by 100 is 10.
Now, what's different then between auto-fill
and auto-fit, that I'm going to show you next?
So auto-fill does it like this,
and auto-fit does it like this.
Okay?
So, what happened here, what's the difference?
Well, it actually still created the 10 columns.
And we can see that here
by the last line number, which is 11.
And so this means that the grid actually has 10 columns.
So you can see that it's 10 columns,
because it ends here still at number 11,
but what auto-fit does
is that it actually collapses these tracks
and gives it a width of zero,
creating then this extra space that we see here.
Okay?
So basically, it is as if
it only created really eight tracks,
right, but actually, down here,
you can see that it's only like eight column tracks, right?
So, it creates these tracks,
and then leaves this empty space here,
which we can then fill, if we want it.
Okay?
And so that's the big difference.
With auto-fill, it actually creates 10 columns,
so as many as fit in here,
while with auto-fit, it still creates these 10 columns,
but then collapses the ones that are empty
to have a width of zero,
okay?
And so what this allows us to do is something really great.
So let me copy this here,
and put it here, and so this allows us
to use the minmax function in here like this.
So, minmax, it should be at least 100 pixels,
but it can be up until one fractional unit.
So watch what happens now.
And here we go.
So it occupied our entire grid here.
So our entire grid container, right?
So basically filling that extra space
that was left over by expanding these columns
into more than 100 pixels of width.
Now, to show this even better to you,
let's go back to having the width of 90%,
90%,
okay.
And so now let me show you what happens as we decrease this.
So right now the container has 1,007 pixels of width.
So and now I start reducing,
and watch what is going to happen.
So right now we have 831 pixels,
and so we can still fit the eight columns in there, right?
Because each column has to be
at least 100 pixels here, right?
So 100 pixels has to be the minimum of each column,
and right now we have 830 pixels.
So we can still fit the eight columns in here.
But watch what happens if I decrease this even further.
And so, here you see it.
The last grid item moved into the next line,
and that's because right now
we only have seven columns here.
So let's check it out, and yeah,
you see that we only have 796, so it's almost 800,
but it's no longer really 800.
And so we can no longer fit eight columns here
with 100 pixel each, right?
Because for that we would need 800 pixels.
And so what auto-fit here does then
is that it simply creates instead of eight columns,
seven columns, and so that's actually
what you see down here.
So now you'll no longer have eight columns, but seven.
And as you can imagine, this will keep happening
as we decrease this even further.
So let's now actually, instead of 100 pixels,
put 200 pixels here, okay.
So what's gonna happen then?
Well, instead of having eight columns, we have five.
And that's because right now we have 1,007 pixels
and as you see,
1,007
divided by 200 pixels
fits approximately five columns, all right?
And so we have five columns now,
with each of them with 201 pixels wide.
As we decrease this, this is what happens.
So, we no longer have enough space for the five columns,
and so we end up with having only the four columns.
And so each one has 240 pixels,
so which is still well above our 200 limit.
So, not this one here again,
so let's decrease this even further, even further,
and so, you see what happened?
It changed it from four to three,
'cause it no longer has the space now.
So again, 797, it no longer fits four columns of 200,
because for that we need 800, which we don't have anymore.
And so we only have three columns, okay?
And now actually you see that it started here a third line,
so let's actually format that as well.
So, do you remember how that works?
So, grid-auto-rows,
and remember we had 150 pixels,
and so let's continue with that, and all right.
So now you see that all of these have 150 pixels
of height.
So let's decrease this even further,
and at some point you can guess it,
we end up with a two column layout,
which is now two by four.
And actually we can starting to see
this is really a flexible, a adaptive, layout, right?
Really responsive, without writing a single media query.
So this absolutely fantastic,
and really useful, and so this trick that we have here
in this line with this auto-fit and then the minmax
between a fixed number and a 1fr,
that is a huge trick that we can use and will use
to build our layouts, which will then automatically adapt
to the screen size without us
having to worry about anything,
without having to write any media query,
or anything like that,
okay?
Now, let's decrease it even further,
and now it's really a one column layout,
so really like a completely responsive layout
for like a small phone or something like that.
Okay?
And so it created these eight rows now,
all with 150 pixels, as we specified,
and all in one column.
Okay.
So you see this is really responsive,
really adaptive to our screen width.
Okay.
So, I didn't just want to throw this line of code to you
without explaining how everything works.
Instead, we built up from the beginning,
first learning how the minmax function works,
then how auto-fill and auto-fit work,
and then finally we brought it all together
to learn how to build these adaptive,
these responsive, layouts,
without writing a single line of media query, okay?
So grid allows us to do this, and once again
this is a huge step forward for CSS,
and it makes it so much easier
to code our designs or layouts using CSS Grid.
Okay, so I hope that you understand this,
you can again play around with this if you want.
And if you want to see my code,
actually, so these four examples
that we just coded in this section,
all you have to do is to come here to my profile,
which is here codepen.io/ my name,
and then here in the public pens,
you'll have the ones that we covered in this section,
Part 1, two, three, and four,
to review the code if you want.
Or of course, if you code it along with me
during these videos, then you have your own code
to play around with, and you can make some changes
and play around with this
until everything makes a lot of sense.
All right?
So, at this point we actually covered almost everything
there is to know about CSS Grid.
So, you could already start building
your own CSS Grid layouts
without having to watch any more videos.
But I decided, of course,
that I want to add yet another project to this course.
And so in the next section we will start
an entire new project built from scratch using CSS Grid
so that you can use and apply
all of what we learned here in this section
to a real world project.
Because knowing how all of this works is one thing,
but then applying it to a real world context
is something really different, okay?
And so that's why I added a new project
that we will build together in the next section.
So I hope that you're really as excited as I am for that,
and so after you're ready playing around with all of this,
then I hope to welcome you to the next section
and to start a project with you.